# What is an OS?

0. An operating system is the abstraction that helps connect userspace and hardware! There
   are many layers of abstractions built for us: we have C code thats been compiled, which
   relies on system libraries (think cstdlib), which makes use of syscalls which are
   provided by the OS! e.g. We never manually interact with the filesystem

1. Distribute resources! Imagine multiple users (or processes) trying to run their
   program. How do we choose who evently recieves what data? the operating system is in
   charge of that! It could be done through a policy as well (quota, first come first
   serve, etc)

2. from the perspective of the system, the OS is the software running in priviliged mode!
   this could be like ring0 or whatever but there are physical hardware checks (think
   lgdt, tss, etc in x86) Theres a flag set in hardware that shows if the current software
   can do more stuff (accesss memory, etc)

## Structure of a system?

Theres two 'bubbles' of a system: We usually have userspace and kernel mode. Applications
in userspace make use of system libraries; which are just normal libraries as well. Its
just ordinary code that interacts with the kernel to get stuff done. If you think about
it, everything lives somewhere on memory. The operating system has the ability to view
memory and theres some memory that can only be touched by the OS.

If processes want to do stuff that involve os actions, they need to make use of syscalls,
which are like function calls but its a protected way of nicely asking the os to do
something for you. These can be written by yourself but most often you want to do them via
syscalls (open, close, read, etc). These syscalls are then created to have another
abstraction layer (malloc, memcpy, etc)

tldr; the operating system is just code that has more power and that lets it interact with
hardware (like memory)

## System approaches

How should we arrange an OS internally? There *is* a layered by layer approach:
dependencies point downwards into the core of the system. For instance, the usermode would
be in the shell of the system, with layers of abstraction behind each other, with
processor management and memoryu management at the core! However, this isn't really
realistic. 

A different implimentation is a monolithic kernel; everything is interlinked with
everything else! Think linux, windows, etc. However, a general prevailing structure will
usually form.

# Processes and threads

Remember how we said the os needs to be able to run more than one thing? The processor
will give the os the ability to do so, but the processor itself cannot run more than one
thing at once unless you have multithreading: but you still want more processes than you
ahve threads. 

## what is a process? what is a thread?

A process is closer to an abstraction of a thing that "runs", or a user level execution.
It owns resources allocated for program execution. It encompasses one more more threads.

A thread is the sequence of instruciotns that are ran. 

Think of processes as a space in memory of a thing to be executed, and a thread being the
actual hardware that executes a process.

## Scheduling

So how do we run muiltiple processes on one thread? We can have a dispatcher (scheduler)
that decides which process to run by having each process run for a few instructions,
before returning back to the dispatcher which makes a jump. States have to be preserved in
between (storing register data), loaded and restored. 

Using this, it appeares that multiple processes are running at once, but in reality only
one program is active at one point. Thus, there is a model of having sequential processes
with a single thread each "running" at the same time.

## How are processes created?


